Tom Bender is physicist and philosopher at heart,
and an architect by trade.
He uses all of these skills to create alchemical changes
in the dwelling he modifies and creates.
Tom shows us in this interview that the age of expansion
is all but dead, and giving way to a simpler
and more contemplative use of space and resources,
including our own internal spiritual resources.
One of the tenants of using space in a sacred manner
is understanding that there's a life force called "chi"
that permeates all of life, a force that the western world
gives little, if any, consideration to.
(ethereal music)
In the very first part of your book,
you talk about chi and the life force energy.
One thing I thought was kind of interesting
is I decided to go ahead and count,
in all the different languages,
the number of different ways in which that word
is used and said, the different words for
"life force energy," and as I recall, it was somewhere
between 85 and 90 words around the world
for "chi" or "life force energy," and yet,
most people in the western world
really know very little of this.
Why?
I think that probably goes back to
about 300 A.D. when the Christian church
banished direct experience of the sacred.
It came back during the gothic period,
but then there was a few martyrs at that point,
and it got surpressed again,
but it has been outside of our culture, I think,
because we focused on the rational part of ourselves
because its power was suddenly revealing itself.
I don't think that's bad.
What I have learned of chi energy
is it's a totally different consciousness.
It's a totally different media,
it's outside of space and time,
it's a magnetic defraction energy
which is sort of superimposed or inside
of the material world,
but it is the realm where quantum non-locality
takes place, where everything is connected,
where you flip a photon here, ten lightyears away,
its partner flips instantly.
That means that everything is connected,
everything is consciousness,
and everything is aware of everything going on,
and I call that our mainframe consciousness,
using computer analogy, and that it's integral
consciousness that everything is a part of.
Someplace along the line,
we grew this computer peripheral
on top of our neck that has all these
cameras and these audio receivers and things.
Stuck simply in the five senses.
The five senses, and they are wonderful
because they are so powerful in helping us
deal with living in the material dimension
of our reality, but the problem is
that they drown out the chi energy,
the integral consciousness.
We have to learn, as every culture has,
how to set aside that rational world,
and be able to connect back in with the other.
The rational is so powerful, it's like an engine,
this V8 800 horsepower engine,
but without a steering wheel, without brakes,
without a map, it's creating all over hell,
destroying everything.
Boy, is that the truth (laughs).
We're sitting here in your home and your office
certainly exemplify having created the sacred space,
which we're going to be talking about,
and the flow of the chi, the energy, through here.
It's a blustery rainy day on the coast of Oregon,
just a beautiful setting.
A usual summer day.
Usual summer day, but you can feel the energy
pouring in and permeating everything.
This isn't where you necessarily started
in your own internal mental landscape.
You say yourself you were quite left-brained at one time.
Yeah, I grew up in the 40s and 50s in the Midwest
and there was nothing else except that
rational landscape and I, of course,
bought into it and became the total left brain-
We didn't have any geeks at that time,
but I would have been a geek at that point.
I started out in physics and ended up in architecture,
and eventually, over time, I learned to let go of
some of that stuff, thank goodness.
Now, how old were you, because one of your mentors
was Butnam Sephor and certainly is some
very forward thinking.
At what point in your life did you start letting go
of those severely rationalist point of view?
Oh, mid 70s.
Okay.
So you were well into your adulthood.
Tell us a little bit about how your journey into the
more sacred and into the more quantum world began.
One big step was when we built our house here,
and we built it to last for 200 years, not for 20 years,
and built it totally by hand.
We had no electricity here and we sharpened the saws
and cut the plywood and built it,
and finished it, oiled the floors, went back to Portland
to get the rest of our stuff, and the next morning,
it had burned down, which is a bit of a shock in itself.
Wow, no kidding.
Then, a few weeks later, we were talking in Portland
with a friend who had moved from the east coast
and his wife was with him, and she got a very strange
look on her face.
She said, "Well, I've got to tell you.
"I had a dream a month before that your house
"was going to burn on that date
"and I wrote it down in my journal."
She'd never had precognitive dreams before,
and didn't know us really.
Who would you pick up a phone to a stranger
and say, "I just dreamed your house is gonna burn down?"
Right, not a phone call you'd would want to make.
She didn't even know that we were building this house.
She assumed it was our house in Portland,
but that was a real wake up call saying,
"Okay, there's more to this world
"than what we pick up through our computer peripherals."
There's more going on and please don't tell me again.
I got the message.
(laughter)
Well, that was a harsh message.
Did you ever figure out why the house burned down,
or did you simply leave a candle lit?
It was oily rags from oiling the floor,
and it was the second time we'd oiled the floor.
No problems the first time.
It was 32 degrees when we left.
We put the rags on a rock in the entryway,
and my assumption was spontaneous combustion
is something that happens in a closet under the stairs
after a couple months.
Half the fire people said, "Yeah."
The others said, "No, that's of course what it was."
When we rebuilt, I put the rags in a fire pit outside
and three hours, they burst into flame.
Oh, interesting.
I think what happened was a part of the oil on the floor
had gotten sticky, and I probably had added
some turpentine to the rag to get the excess off of it,
and that that lowered the flash point and made it go fast.
That's just what set it off.
A month ahead of time, remember that, Bender.
Exactly.
I was going to say the month ahead of time
is the interesting part.
Yeah.
Okay, you had the oily rags.
Have you ever had a chance to look at it since then
and try to put together why that had to happen in that way?
Because I needed to wake up.
I needed to be aware that there was more
than just the rational world,
and to at least get out of the,
"I know this is true, I know this is bullshit,"
put that third bin there.
"I have no clue," or "I don't know enough."
Maybe.
It's a humble bin.
Yeah, it's a humble bin.
(laughter)
So you've done some spectacular projects
through your life in terms of sustainable architecture.
You've demonstrated that in your own home,
but you have some real underlying tenants.
You're a philosopher at heart.
Sounds like you're more a philosopher
and a physicist, even, than an architect,
and these principles are really underlying
all of your work in sustainable living and community.
Let's start with your perception of what is
awry right now, what we've done to ourselves
in terms of the chi of our communities,
and our families, and our relationships.
I don't think there's anything awry.
Okay.
I think everything is as it needs to be.
That doesn't means it's comfortable,
but I think that things have to get to the intensity
of what we would now say, "offness,"
to make us really clear what we need to change and how.
We have been in a period of growth when growth is possible
when we tapped into fossil fuels, and that just-
A forest when there's a fire or something is log,
a forest grows up, the first succession.
Out here, it's the alder trees.
They grow up quickly and capture all the sunlight,
but then another forest grows up in between.
The conifers grow up between and the alders rot away.
You move from the growth to the sustainable,
in that case, ecosystem, in our case, culture.
That's where we are, and that's why we feel
that something is off because it's the past phase,
which is right in itself ending, and a new phase beginning.
We're in that transition.
We're the alder trees that are starting to decay.
Nope, nope.
No?
We're both. We're the forest.
We're the forest.
We're the alder trees and we're the growing conifers.
We're the sustainable, which is growing within
the growth culture.
Let's say for this is the culture that is beginning now
to need to transition into a new growth,
new type of culture, what are some of the factors
you feel we need to begin releasing, and letting go of,
and allowing to give way to other factors?
Where would you put your emphasis on it?
Let go of everything.
(laughter)
Okay, because you do.
In your book, you talk a lot about letting go,
letting go of concepts of what family
and relationship to each other, and community is,
old ways of letting go of old ways of looking,
even at what a house is,
how a house and the rooms of the house
should be viewed, which we'll get to in a little bit,
which I find quite interesting.
It seems that you are about letting go
on a lot of levels.
That's essential in the process,
and it's essential in the realms that we are discovering,
all these additional realms, not just the physical,
and they do not work on a causal basis,
so we can't operate in the same way.
We have to just be in the moment,
be in the now with them and whatever happens.
It's also that going from a growth to a sustainable world,
everything operates on almost inverse,
180 degree different principles.
Everything that we assumed was absolutely the way to be,
and it was the way to be during that period,
is now absolutely 180 degrees off.
There are various degrees of urgency to that message, too,
environmentally, and in terms of our eco-sustainability.
Can you address some of the issues that really are
more paramount to be addressed in this transition,
and then we can go into others from there?
One is energy, obviously.
On one side, it's the global warming issues
that are coming to the fore.
The opposite side of that is the peak oil,
which we're into also.
They both are dealing with the fossil fuel energies,
this huge storehouse of energy slaves
that have supported our whole culture,
and that from using up all the easy stuff to get to,
and getting less and less net energy
our of more and more work to get what's left,
and having to compete more,
it being a seller's market instead of a buyer's market,
all that shifts and it says
the sooner we shift to not just more efficient processes,
but really rethinking the whole thing from the goals
that we want to achieve to how we get there
is vital.
It's been very easy to throw more money
and more energy at problems
rather than going to the root and solving them.
All of our systems have gotten incredibly inefficient.
They don't appear that way, but they are.
Take forestry for example.
The commercial forest rotations have dropped
to about 40 years.
They cut everything when it gets 40 years of age,
but if you go out and look at a hillside of stumps,
it's going to take 20 years before it even captures
all the solar energy that's coming into it.
So you're wasting half of the growth, and you're also,
if you go from 40 to, say, 160 year rotations,
you're getting way more material, more wood, better wood.
You're only having to harvest
one-fourth of the times you would.
You only have to replant one-fourth of the times,
you only have to do thinning one-fourth of the times.
All of the work that's involved gets decreased dramatically,
and the economic benefits comes out to be
something like 20 times as good.
Yeah, but where's the instant gratification in that?
It has nothing to do with that
from a real economic standpoint.
I looked at that and said,
"How can this be? How can we ignore that?"
We ignore it because, literally in this case,
we've cut down the alternatives.
Yes.
For a system based on carpet structure
and bottom line in an immediate time period,
sure, you cut everything as quick as you can
and it really looks good while you're CEO,
and the next guy ends up with all the empty hillsides.
Stumps.
If you're the next guy, if you're the stump CEO,
what's your best option?
It's to harvest as quick as you can,
to start getting some money rolling in,
but it is not the best in terms of the long term economics,
and we're always in the long term of either
the business or the culture of the economy.
This is true every place across the board,
education, everything.
Do you feel that modern culture
of the last, say, 50 years,
is different, historically, than any other period of time
in terms of the focus, almost solely,
on instant gratification, and immediate growth,
and immediate returns?
Was it that way in the past?
I don't know. I wasn't there.
Just looking at it historically,
it seems as though we really have had
very little forethought in the last few decades
as to what this planet can sustain,
and not only that, what we as human beings can sustain.
The basis of the growth system
is to maximize what comes into the tree,
or the person, or the corporation, or whatever it is,
and that means you cut out all the future stuff,
and it means that not only do you do that,
but you get into people's minds
that that is the way, the way to be.
It's not that we need to let go of either the rational
or any of the pieces we've had, it's that we
put together the intuity of consciouness,
and the rational consciousness.
As much as this culture has been,
is totally different from anything before.
What we're going into is totally different
from anything before because we have the potential
of that power, ability of things.
Second world war was amazing,
what we accomplished just in industrial output
to support wars all the way around the world.
Going to the moon was amazing.
To marshall the skills and abilities
to do something that had never been dreamed of before.
Putting that together with really getting clear
on what our goals that nourish us as individuals,
as a culture, as a planet, and putting together the goals,
the intuition, and the rational, wow.
I agree with you, I think it's exciting times ahead.
We've got some wonderful stuff coming ahead.
I think so too.
Let's go back to another more ancient model.
Let's go back to the Egyptians, for example,
and their understanding of chi,
their understanding of life force and sacred space.
Some of the work that you've done, as I understand it,
has been, if not directly based on,
certainly based on the concepts
of some of what the Egyptians knew in their time.
Can you talk a little bit about
some of the ancient understandings of chi?
I can try.
I spent a short part of my life teaching architectural
history so I put on my historian hat.
Okay, let's hear it.
As I was learning about chi energy and place
because I came into it through architecture,
through practicing architecture more than
as a historian or anything.
I started looking back at these other cultures
and discovering that they were using it,
and finding in one culture and then another,
knowing that suddenly, 65 or 80 cultures did it,
what did they do, how did they use it?
The Egyptians were a wonderful
ground of expertise and skill.
If you go into the Temple of Hathor
at Dendera, for example, it's a later Egyptian temple,
any images you see of the temple or photographs
or anything, they're of the building,
but the building, when you go to the temple,
the building is inside a precinct, a sacred precinct
that's about 900 feet square,
which is nothing in itself.
It's enclosed by a wall, which is nothing in itself,
but this wall is 30 to 50 feet thick,
and 50 to 80 feet high.
Thick?
Amazing.
It has something like five million cubic feet
of mud bricks, every one made by hand.
50 feet thick.
I didn't realize those walls were that thick.
Why?
Well, the Egyptian creation story
isn't this fancy thing of we came from the Pleiades
or whatever, they say, "We came from the mud."
I heard that, I said, "That's not pre Dob."
(laughter)
But being there and seeing that
the annual floods of the Nile
brought mud
which was the fertility, which was life,
which was their culture.
Mud was their source of life.
If you go to the first cataract of the Nile
they have excavated mud brick temple upon mud brick temple,
30 or so mud brick temples built on top of each other.
It's every hundred years or so,
there's a major flood that washes away the temple.
And I said to myself, of course,
"Well why didn't they build them out of stone?"
(laughter)
And the answer is
that the temple was an offering.
It was a celebration of the mud,
which was the source of life.
So everything is totally different when you get into
this kind of world.
You're talking about meaning, not aesthetics,
when you get into architecture.
The Temple of Hathor, going back to that-
So every year after the floods they had to clean
the new silt, the new mud that came into the precincts.
So everybody made bricks and added to the wall
but the intention in this and the energy
of people putting it into this as the wall became
20 feet thick, 30 feet thick, 40 feet thick, 50 feet thick,
added power to this place, said,
"This place is important to us, we value it."
And the energy keeps building and building in a place.
Anytime that we conceive of anything,
you know some crazy idea,
it exists on the energy realm, the chi energy realm,
the same as the material realm
and that exists forever just like we exist forever
in the energy realms.
And over a period of time if there is a deity, let's say,
in Egypt and that is honored for a hundred years,
a thousand years, five thousand years,
all those prayers, all that celebration, all that gratitude
goes into that energy ball and that energy ball
gets stronger and stronger and stronger.
And how the Egyptians dealt with this architecturally is
fascinating.
Again, every culture's different.
But the typical temple, there will be a small sanctuary
in the middle.
You go into the temple and you start a big
hall of columns and then it gets smaller and darker
and smaller and darker as you get into the inner sanctum,
getting out of the bright sunlight,
letting all that exterior world,
all our computer peripherals shut down quietly
and focus inward.
You get into the center
and there is a granite sanctuary.
Granite being crystalline and focusing the life force energy
and it's a absolutely plain, very simple place
but it is where the energy is held.
Then around that is a whole series of chapels
of dealing with that deity in relation to
another of the deities in the pantheon.
So that in this case
they're linking the energy from this deity,
that energy ball, to the energy balls
of all the other deities and bringing it together
in this chapel or in the inner sanctum of the temple.
The temples also, if you go to the...
Can't remember, one of the other temples,
Temple of Horus at Edfu,
the precinct wall, which in that case is stone
surrounding the temple, and the inside of it
they've got all the paternity of the temple.
This temple descended from this temple which
was torn down a thousand years ago,
which is descendent of that one and back, back, back
in through time.
And this isn't just proving royal blood.
It is linking, again, to the energy of each of those
energy balls through time, through that deity,
in that place.
And then the Egyptians would have the
ceremonial calendar of the year
going up and down the Nile from one temple to another.
And this linking together the energy, again,
from place to place.
And then in the Temple of Hathor, again,
through the huge thick outer walls
there are hidden crypts inside the walls
that held special imagery
and was used for special initiatory ceremony and things.
So there's layer after layer after layer of techniques
of working with the energy.
The statues are turned into living statues,
as they're called in many cultures.
There's the famous one of
(mumbles) I can't remember.
Words, names don't stay in here very much any more.
There's a famous
statue of a Pharoah sitting very stiffly
as is normal on some Egyptian sculpture
with Horus sitting around his head.
What a weird thing.
But what we know now is
that's a trans-channeling posture that many people,
when they are channeling, go into this body stiffness
and open and the image is of Horus
speaking through the Pharoah.
Which one is this?
Do you remember the name yet?
It's in my book, I can't remember.
I'll find it.
Yeah, I want to see that one.
And I was at a sculpture exhibit
of Egyptian sculpture in Portland a month or so ago
and there was a statue of a scribe.
It was a son of a Pharoah or something
but there was this old wrinkly guy sitting there sort of
stooped over, you know, writing away or something.
I'd seen it in the Egyptian museum in Cairo years ago.
But this time I could really see it, it was lit.
And I saw that the details, again, are where you see.
He wasn't looking at this, he was staring,
he was entranced, he was channeling.
What he was scribing was what he was channeling.
The irises of his eyes were huge.
You don't see that in a photograph taken from
far away.
No, it makes perfect sense.
When you see, you get around to the side and you see
where he's looking, how he's looking
compared to the writing.
Oh, it wasn't just that he was literate
and was able to read and write and was honoring, no.
He was channeling the spirits and connecting to them.
Right.
Another whole piece of this is the healing temples.
There were sub-temples in the precinct, again, of
Hathor at Dendera in which they would have
little chambers all around and they had a sacred well,
a sacred spring there.
And they had healing statues
that were inscribed with hieroglyphics and would often
be sitting sort of like a pan of stone.
And people would take the water from the well
and pour it over the statue
and it turned into what we would now call homeopathics.
Oh, I see, the actual fluid.
The statue was energized, it energized the water
as it flowed over it and then the person would drink it,
bathe in it, whatever.
Again, this had to do with a, maybe,
many, many years of intention that had gone into the statue
as well as the geometry or imagery itself
and maybe the deity attached with it?
That and just the fact that
it didn't have to have a lot of years of intention
in the making.
There is a ceremony of the opening of the eyes
of statues that is common in many cultures
where they go through a
ritual process of opening to the spirit world and asking
the spirit, the deity, whatever, to come
and live in this place and be in connection.
I see.
So it can be brought into any place
the same that we can bring good energy into
any home, any place.
We don't have to go through all of the fancy
rituals that were developed from one culture to another.
Everyone used what they stumbled on
and every culture stumbled on different things
but once you're familiar with them you see
that they all come out of the same roots and
there are alternatives.
We don't have to follow the rules.
(laughter)
Yes, I like that about you in your thinking and your work.
Okay, so here you are with the Egyptian culture
as one example of
high intentionality in that everything was for purpose.
Very few accidents left behind.
And now we have a person moving into a new development
with maybe 200 tracked houses that have just gone in
and this is the world of growth,
this is the progression we have made.
How do we begin to re-introduce creativity
and sacredness into something that can seem as
cookie-cutter and haphazard as going into
a condominium or a cookie-cutter home somewhere
in a track of hundreds?
Well I've dealt with that all my life,
trying to do more than I was capable of.
(laughter)
Trying to do something I'd see in a temple
in Japan or Egypt or whatever and say,
"This would really work nicely."
But it never worked because
I don't think that you can do anything
that is different from what you are.
Anything we build is just a mirror reflecting us
and our intentions
and that the first answer is you don't do anything with that
you do it with yourself.
You ignore what's around if you want
or to the degree that you can.
Focus on yourself and getting clear
and then whatever your intention is will just manifest.
But then dealing with what is there,
it's the way any architecture project is dealt with.
You find out what you can't deal with or can't change
or what isn't worth changing, you know, what the limits are.
Can you build a fence?
Can you shut out some of this?
No, but can you maybe build some plants
and make grow like a fence?
Can you plant things that will bring in birds
and animals and things?
Can you bring in native plants which tie with
the wonderful spirit which is developed in each
specific place over millennia with the climate and the,
just all the patterns that are there together.
One thing is to develop what I call sort of x-ray vision.
You walk around inside your house
and your x-ray vision goes through the wall
and tries to remember what's outside it
because a lot of people forget
or they design houses to look like something,
not to connect you with what's on the other side of it.
And you say, "Oh, this room has a window over here
"but there's a beautiful tree over here.
"We need to cut a hole in the wall."
We did a project this last year
showing how we could makeover,
take the standard three bedroom ranch house
and we turned it into flex housing.
There's now I think eight people living and working there.
But it was a house on top of a full concrete foundation
which was half daylight.
So there are these big concrete walls
looking out on an incredible view of the estuary.
And I discovered that they now have a,
what's my favorite tool is a
diamond bladed, water cooled, concrete cutting chainsaw.
And you just take this, or have somebody,
take this chainsaw and go zoop, zoop, zoop, zoop
and boom, this big slab of concrete falls down
and you've got this big window looking out
at incredible things.
Find out where you can make connection with something
that people have ignored or missed.
Create something of the natural world outside
to connect with or
discover, just bring in the sunlight
or make a shade trellis outside so if it's
a hot sunny climate a wonderful place to be outside
in connection with the rest of creation.
Inside,
again you start with yourself.
The old realtor's trick is you put
some apple cider and cinnamon on the stove.
Or cookies in the oven.
Or cookies in the oven, people come in,
"Oh, I like this."
Right.
But it's the cookies and the cider, it isn't the house.
It's not the condo, it's the cookies.
But start with that.
The smell of fresh bread, flowers,
a song, music, the sound of birds,
all these things transform the dreariest place
just to begin with.
Another thing is to start with is don't depend on stuff.
It's usually, "Oh, I've got this room.
"Oh, there's an empty spot over there,
"I've got to put something there."
Take everything out of a space
and just have the empty space.
Put a pillow down on the floor and sit there,
lean up against the wall or whatever and just say,
"Well, is this okay?
"Or what do I really need?
"What do I want to do in here?
"And what's the minimum that will focus the energy
"just on that?"
We did a church project here a couple years ago
which started with a wonderful site with trees,
a wonderful garden.
And when they were interviewing me I said,
"Well my intention is to open the church,
"the sanctuary and open it out into the garden."
When I sat down to design it, and this was a case
where I was consciously working in co-creation with
the spirits of the congregation and of the church
and of the community and the place.
This hand would reach out and no.
Every time I tried to draw a window, no.
Interesting.
No window, no window!
(laughter)
And so I go to the building committee meeting and say-
My hand won't draw a window.
(laughter)
The other guys on the design committee won't let me.
And what we came to was
clarity of intention means one thing at a time.
There's a beautiful garden out there.
There's a space in here for meditation,
for ritual, for ceremony, for services.
One thing at a time.
So the narthex of a church which is sort of the entry
which then goes usually into the sanctuary,
I designed that so that it connected,
created sacred space and acted as a gateway
separately to the garden in one direction
and to the sanctuary in a second direction.
So you have them both but you can focus totally
on each of them.
Right.
And get that clarity, that coherence,
which is what empowers that energy realm of it.
And then we put low windows around the sanctuary
so you can't see out but we put like a moat, around
that the water off the roof, as you're hearing now probably
(laughs)
fills this moat.
You sit there and you don't feel trapped inside
because you can feel the connection.
There's water and you can see the
little wavelets sort of shimmering
with the raindrops falling on it.
And then when the sun comes out, it reflects off of that
and reflects up on the ceiling inside
and the whole ceiling will shimmer.
And at times it becomes almost coherent infinity symbols,
figure eights of light just floating on the ceiling.
This brings a liveness into the space
which came out of that, both the separation, the inner focus
but then within that the connectedness
of the integral consciousness.
Beautiful.
Now you've also-
I'm gonna interrupt you.
How does somebody do that in their house?
Yeah.
Let's say that's not really an option, okay.
Say you're going into a condo because you can afford it.
There you go.
Okay well,
the apartment I had in Minneapolis one time
when I was teaching, I was on the upper floor.
There was a back door entrance and a little porch roof,
flat porch roof out behind it.
And after spring, fall I suddenly discovered,
I was laying in bed one morning and I looked up
and the whole ceiling had these circles on it.
And it'd go bing.
There was an icicle out there that was dropping
a single drop into this still pool on the roof
and these concentric circles would burst out from it.
I just lay there all morning just looking at this.
And this is something that you can do easily.
Just have a basin of water in front of a window
with something dropping water into it.
Right a simple little fountain.
It's the wrong example for most things but
to give the idea that there's ways to
bring that kind of energy into a space.
It really takes observation
and your intention in terms of what's important to you.
Your awareness.
Your awareness, right.
Well one of the other things you talk about in your book
that I like is when you're saying throw out your ideas
of how a space can be utilized
and you don't have to assume.
You have a picture in there.
It's just such a sweet little space.
It's a kitchen nook that someone decided
no, I love this place, this is my bedroom.
And they changed a kitchen nook to their bedroom.
Can you talk a little bit about our preconceived notions
about how space is to be used
and what we actually could do.
Well that is a condo that you just moved me into.
(laughter)
It was a place that we rented in Salem.
It didn't have much to connect with the outside world
but it had this little dining nook off the kitchen
with windows around, it was not leaded pane
but narrow paned windows around three sides of it.
There were casements that all opened out
and there was plants outside.
Just a lovely little spot.
And this is where I want to be.
I don't care if it's part of the kitchen.
I mean now we live with our bed in the living room
almost of our house.
I know, we'll take a look at that. (laughs)
And you know, just erase the labels off of things
and say what feels best for each part of your life.
Somebody was saying the other day that
a way of starting is asking people
what do you do in your house?
And how much time do you spend doing this and this and this
and what does it need?
How many people wake up early
and like to sit in the sun with a cup of coffee
or something?
How many are late nighters,
or like to sit around the dining table at sunset
and watch the sun go down?
In this case you'd move the house or move how you use it
differently, depending on who you are, things you love,
the patterns that you're dealing with.
Well and even before you do that,
people hearing this interview, choose.
Choose the place that you're going to move into accordingly.
If you're a morning person and you like that morning sun
coming in and while you have your cup of coffee
or your tea, then you want to start looking for that.
So start becoming aware of what it is your being needs
when you're looking for a place.
Not just where you can put your stuff
or fit all of your stuff.
And that brings us really more into the
spiritual aspect of how we choose to structure our lives
and one of the things you commented on,
I noticed several times on your website and this book,
Building With The Breath Of Life, is that
because we have, as a natural outcropping of our
rapid growth and aggressive growth,
really become very disconnected from the givingness of life.
We're taking too much and we're giving too little.
Can you talk about that a little bit?
I mean even to the point where we go out and
buy more stuff rather than take care of a house plant
that's sitting right there and needing to be watered
that we already bought.
Let it die and get another one at Target, right?
But that whole mentality and how we start
making the subtle shifts.
Sometimes that stuff just, you trip over
and bump into it and say,
"How could I have been so blind?"
And I was sitting with a client putting together the
program for our project.
And they're saying well we want this, I want this,
I want this, writing down I want this, I want this,
I want this.
And suddenly I was just hearing
I want, I want, I want, I want.
And the circuits fried.
And I said, "Well wait a minute.
"Let's try this backwards and say what can we give?
"Let's just be curious."
Try it on and see if we approach something differently.
And we look at the project and say,
"Oh, well we need a retaining wall along the sidewalk here
"or something but it we make that sitting height,
"we're giving a place for people to sit."
And well we don't just want to do landscaping
just to make the building look pretty.
If we plant some trees along the street,
we can cool the whole street and make it wonderful.
We can bring the birds in and make them
part of what we hear inside the building.
So giving things to the birds, giving things to the people.
A pathway through a project to connect things
on one side to the other.
Nature works in wholeness.
And we're used to an engineering approach
of dealing with one thing at a time.
We've got a toilet, or we didn't have toilets in those days,
we had a chamber pot, what do we do with it?
Oh, we throw it out the window.
Well that doesn't get too nice for the neighbors.
Okay, well, okay so we develop the flush toilet.
Well what do you do with all the sewage?
Ah, run the pipe over the river, get rid of it.
What about the people downstream?
The people upstream are doing that to you?
We're not thinking about things wholistically,
we're just paying attention to one thing at a time.
But everything is connected in networks and webs and things.
And you know you can't even disturb one piece of it
without changing all those connections.
So when we look at it in wholes, we find that
what nourishes everything nourishes us even more, the most.
Because if we're surrounded by health and vitality,
that feeds us.
Yes and we're starving to death.
Yeah.
As a culture, we're starving to death.
Literally, the-
I saw something six months ago, a study done
about the nutritional value of wheat has dropped
from 90% protein to 9% in the last hundred years.
Apples and fruits have lost 80% of their nutrients
because we look at outsides.
We look just at how things look,
things that could be copied easily.
You buy the pretty apple, you buy the
bread that looks good on the outside.
But the wheat that was used in the bread
was grown with artificial fertilizers in depleted soils
and so they were able to create more volume
of wheat or bread out of it but it's the same amount of
nutrition that was available to begin with.
So it's thinned out and thinned out and thinned out
and you select for what things look like
rather than what the nutritional value.
And I mean that's spiritually as well as just food wise.
That's what we do with each other.
Yeah.
You put on nice clothes, you put on some makeup,
little bit of hair preparation stuff
and that's how we actually view each other.
Yeah.
And that came right back into architecture for me.
I mean earlier it happened but the concept.
I read a thing in the newspaper about
they were excited that some class went together
to raise money to buy a mirror for this little girl
that didn't have a mirror at home.
I mean I thought, you know, how embarrassing for her.
Did she look so unkempt that they, you know.
But then I realized, how do we do our bathrooms?
Wall to wall mirrors.
And that focuses us on outsides again, on how things look,
superficial things.
What if we take them out?
So 30 years ago when I built our house here
I took the mirrors out of the bathroom
and I put a window in over the lavatory.
And you go in there in the morning,
you stagger into the bathroom hungover or whatever
and if you look in the mirror, you get a real good
self-esteem boost.
Ugh!
But if you go in the bathroom and you look out and say,
"Oh, look at the sunlight, the water drops on the-"
I noticed that.
I used your bathroom I thought, "Oh this is beautiful."
You're looking out on ferns and trees.
And you go,"Ahh!"
And then you are ahh instead of ugh.
Instead of automatically having your face
staring back at you.
Yeah.
What a limited vision out into the world.
So that doesn't mean you can't use a mirror.
I put them on the inside of medicine cabinets
or on the back of doors or things.
But, again, it's our cultural values that say
wall to wall mirrors, think of in terms of surface qualities
of things rather than inner qualities.
And once we start focusing on inner qualities,
once our attention is not focused by our
computer peripherals on those surface things
then we do focus more inward and we feel
how we feel about people and how we feel
and pay attention to that rather than how things look.
We look to the realities, not to the aesthetics.
And in general it's time to start giving again.
Any further comment on that one?
Well I've probably worn out the paper with
quoting Malidoma Some on that.
He talks about, in his autobiography, Of Water and Spirit,
about how work in the Dagara village
was done communally.
I love that story.
Can you tell us that story?
Well he talks in one place about women making pottery
and that they sit around, singing and dancing
and having a good time together and
you know working the mud and getting it ready
and nothing happens and things just go on.
And suddenly at the end of the day,
a flurry of pots just happen and they are beautiful
and they're connected and they have
wonderful imagery and things on them.
But he says that work to them-
Nourishment does not come after the work,
it comes before and during through the work.
That it is the raise in the energy is what is important.
And then out of that energy, being able to do
what has to be done, the working the fields
or making the pots or whatever.
And then it's fun and doing it together-
The most wonderful times I've experienced,
one of these was a day that a bunch of people got together
and planted over 800 trees on a salmon race racing project.
Energy of that was just amazing, people working together.
Another time was barn raising a school.
The kids and the parents all together literally
tipping the walls up into place
and the feeling of accomplishment that comes with that.
That sense of working together is wonderful
and that is where you're giving.
And also when in our communities,
it's a poor community, it's a seasonal community
and particularly during the winter everybody's
half unemployed.
And so there's a huge volunteer component
to our community which is based on giving.
People have the time, they don't have the money.
So they get together and somebody drives the
bus for old people that can't drive a car anymore
and somebody else works in the food bank
and somebody else does this and somebody else does that.
All these things together,
it's totally different energy to giving
than to an exchange based on money or something
because when you're giving, you've given from surplus
and the person who's receiving,
"Oh, what a wonderful gift you gave me."
And you say oh, it felt so good and you're getting,
you add up the points on everything
and you end up with 200%.
Yes, you feel both ways.
Respected and respectful and nurturing and nurtured.
And grateful.
And grateful, yes.
And often what we give are things we're not really
aware of the value to other people
because we've had them and so not having them,
we're often more aware of what we don't have
than what we do have because we get too familiar with it.
And so we're giving something that we undervalue
and that other people value more so,
again, the points add up to several hundred percent.
Yes and so we, the message is we just begin.
Yeah.
And one of the images that we had,
I guess it was last month on our feng shui calendar,
was that the economics of nature is extravagance.
Beautiful.
That is how a plant gets the next generation.
It gives this beautiful thing that attracts the hummingbirds
or the bees.
That's so perfectly put.
You think about how much of the time
for that beautiful blossom of the year
is spent in gestation.
Just the gathering the forces, the gathering and so forth
until finally the intention, the time, everything's set
and it bursts forth in this extravagant display.
And we can't give that to ourselves.
We've got to just grind it out.
Hopefully we'll earn a little bit of reward
at the end of the day or at the end of the month.
Yeah, doesn't work.
It should be pretty obvious by now.
(laughter)
(ethereal music)
To get a copy of one of his books
please click on the link to his website below.
I found Building With The Breath of Fire to be a work of art
on all levels with enough consciousness folded into it
to last many a lifetime.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(ethereal music)